# Health-and-Environmental-Issues-Caused-by-PM-2.5-in-California
The following notebook is designed to show how particle matter 2.5 has had an adverse effect on health-related issues. There are several factors which have contributed to the rise of particle matter 2.5 such as the growth of wildfires. Other factors include the emissions from gasoline, oil, diesel and also wood, which is why the particle matter 2.5 rates have been higher over the recent years especially in dry climates. Particle Matter 2.5 has direct health issues related to the topic as well, which is what we are attempting to prove within this notebook and analysis. Our goal is to show that there has been an increase of Asthma related attacks and an overall increase of Asthma diagnosis in the Los Angeles area as they are one of the 5 areas with the highest particle matter 2.5 rating. “For PM2.5, short-term exposures (up to 24-hours duration) have been associated with premature mortality, increased hospital admissions for heart or lung causes, acute and chronic bronchitis, asthma attacks, emergency room visits, respiratory symptoms, and restricted activity days. These adverse health effects have been reported primarily in infants, children, and older adults with preexisting heart or lung diseases. In addition, of all of the common air pollutants, PM2.5 is associated with the greatest proportion of adverse health effects related to air pollution, both in the United States and world-wide based on the World Health Organization’s” (California Air Resources Board, n.d., para. 5). Let this fact sink in there and then think about it, the World needs to change and make changes that can have a positive outlook on the development of the World and also take care of the people who have a chance to make a difference, the youth, and the population that give this nation the ability to continue to grow.
## ESRI ArcGIS Online link: 
https://agis.maps.arcgis.com/home/notebook/notebook.html?id=b16f0158b5a84ba685f565787e78f4b3#
## Scope / Abstract of the Project:
The following notebook is designed to show how particle matter 2.5 has had an adverse effect on health-related issues. There are several factors which have contributed to the rise of particle matter 2.5 such as the growth of wildfires. Other factors include the emissions from gasoline, oil, diesel and also wood, which is why the particle matter 2.5 rates have been higher over the recent years especially in dry climates. Particle Matter 2.5 has direct health issues related to the topic as well, which is what we are attempting to prove within this notebook and analysis. Our goal is to show that there has been an increase of Asthma related attacks and an overall increase of Asthma diagnosis in the Los Angeles area as they are one of the 5 areas with the highest particle matter 2.5 rating. “For PM2.5, short-term exposures (up to 24-hours duration) have been associated with premature mortality, increased hospital admissions for heart or lung causes, acute and chronic bronchitis, asthma attacks, emergency room visits, respiratory symptoms, and restricted activity days. These adverse health effects have been reported primarily in infants, children, and older adults with preexisting heart or lung diseases. In addition, of all of the common air pollutants, PM2.5 is associated with the greatest proportion of adverse health effects related to air pollution, both in the United States and world-wide based on the World Health Organization’s” (California Air Resources Board, n.d., para. 5). Let this fact sink in there and then think about it, the World needs to change and make changes that can have a positive outlook on the development of the World and also take care of the people who have a chance to make a difference, the youth, and the population that give this nation the ability to continue to grow.
## Crisp DM Model
Project Understanding: The goal of this project is to attempt to show how PM 2.5 is affecting the health and lives of the general population in terms of their respiratory and to show the lack of resources with the communities to combat the spread.

Data Understanding:In the aspect of this project, out goal was to bring in CSV style datasets, although we were unable to find the exact data that we were initally looking for we were able to discover datasets that included the whole state of CA, instead of local county datasets. Thus, in otder to understand what we had, it was easier to upload the tables into notebook, and the run queries to clean the tables to display the information that we are looking for and can show the datasets that are involved within the project topic.

Data Preparation: In order to organize the datasets, we decided to create geodatabases with ArcGIS Pro, and then bring in the geodatabases into notebooks for better organization. Selecting the datasets, within the dataset that we are need to be used, integrating the datasets, by joing tables.

Modeling: In this stage we decided to use interpolation techniques to combine the layers that we used. Bringing in each layer combing them to build different models, while also learning how different modeling techniques work. We also decided to play around and use different techniques to try and create additional demonstrations but ran out of time.

Evaluation: The work that was created overall, was to demonstrate that areas that have a higher PM 2.5 rating above 12 or near that number have contributed to the increase of health issues within the general population, but primarly the children and elderly population due to thier lack of a developed system.

Deployment: is demonstrated through the analysis maps and the final output map that demonstrates the lack of hospitals, and the increase in cases of Asthma within Los Angeles and San Bernardino.

## Works Cited
California Air Quality index (AQI) and USA Air Pollution. IQAir. (n.d.). Retrieved December 4, 2022, from https://www.iqair.com/us/usa/california

California Air Resources Board. Inhalable Particulate Matter and Health (PM2.5 and PM10) | California Air Resources Board. (n.d.). Retrieved December 5, 2022, from https://ww2.arb.ca.gov/resources/inhalable-particulate-matter-and-health

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (n.d.). National Environmental Public Health Tracking Network - CDC - Info by location external. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Retrieved December 4, 2022, from https://ephtracking.cdc.gov/showInfoByLocationExt/?&FIPS=06037

Chankaew K, Sinitkul R, Manuyakorn W, Roekworachai K, Kamalaporn H. Spatial Estimation of PM2.5 Exposure and its Association with Asthma Exacerbation: A Prospective Study in Thai Children. Ann Glob Health. 2022 Mar 8;88(1):15. doi: 10.5334/aogh.3513. PMID: 35433288; PMCID: PMC8916056.

Environmental Protection Agency. (n.d.). Why Wildfire Smoke is a Health Concern. EPA. Retrieved December 4, 2022, from https://www.epa.gov/wildfire-smoke-course/why-wildfire-smoke-health-concern

McClure, C. D., & Jaffe, D. A. (2018). US particulate matter air quality improves except in wildfire-prone areas. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 115(31), 7901–7906. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1804353115
